
Hello and welcome, my name is William,
Today we're going to use network flow to solve a problem. The problem we're 
going to tackle I called the "mice and owls" problem which is a slightly harder 
variation of another competitive programming problem which i'll link in the 
description. I love this problem because of its simple elegant solution and its
realistic application, let's have a look.

Suppose M mice are out on a field and there’s a hungry owl about to make a move.
Assume that the owl can reach every mouse.

Further suppose there are H holes scattered across the ground, and that each 
hole has a certain capacity for how many mice can fit in it.

We also happen to know that every mouse is capable of running a distance of r in
any direction before being caught by the owl. The question asks what is the 
maximum number of mice that can find hide safely before being caught?
If you want to attempt the problem, now is a good time to stop the video and
give it a go.

The first step is to figure out which holes each mouse can reach. Visualize this
by drawing a radius of r around each mouse, and if inside the radius there's a
hole or the circle touches a hole we'll assume the mouse can make it to that 
hole.

So if we draw an edge between a mouse and a hole if the mouse can make it to
that hole we get the following graph.

The next step is to actually match mice to holes to maximize the overall
safety of the group. By doing a simple quick inspection it's clear that not
every mouse should be matched to any hole.

For example, this orange mouse should probably not try to run to the hole with
capacity 3, because it's the only mouse that can reach the other hole behind it
with capacity 1.
Making any bad decision like that has the chance to jeopardize maximizing the
overall number of mice that can safely hide. 

The key realization to make is that this graph is bipartite; and once we know
that, it becomes a simpler task to setup the flow graph and run maximum flow to
maximize the overall number of mice which can make it to safety.

Here are the steps I would do to setup the flow graph to run max flow. First I
would create M mice nodes labeled zero through M-1 inclusive.

Then on the over side, I would create H nodes each representing a hole. I would
label, or index those nodes from M to M+H-1 inclusive to give them a different
id then the mouse nodes.

Then place an edge with a capacity of 1 between the mouse and the hole if the
mouse can reach the particular hole.

Connect an edge with capacity 1 from the source to each mouse node to indicate
that each node can have at most 1 mouse.

And lastly, connect an edge from the hole node to the sink with the capacity of
each hole.

The problem has now been transformed into a maximum flow problem. Run any 
max-flow algorithm and the maximum number of mice that are safe is equal to the
value of the max-flow. This is really neat, and it's worth looking at some
source code to really understand this setup and how it works.

Let's have a look at some source code for how to setup a problem like this.

Here we are in the source code. I've laid out some instructions up top here in
case you wanted to download this code and play around with it on your machine.
This program actually uses the Ford Fulkerson flow solver we saw two videos 
back, so I highly recommend you watch that video before continuing. I'll link
it in the description below in case you haven't.

So let's get started, the first thing I do is define a Mouse class, this is just
a wrapper around a point2D object. Effectively, a mouse is just a point a plane.
I also do the same thing with a Hole class except that the Hole class also has a
capacity with addition to a point2D object.

Next up in the main method you see that I'm creating a bunch of mouse objects
and holes with various capacities and placing both of those in arrays.

The last thing I do in the main method is call the solve method which takes as
input the two arrays we just created and a radius. The radius is how far a mouse
can run from its current position before being caught by the owl.

The solve method is where things really start getting interesting. Let's define
some constant to make our lives a lot easier.
- first let's get M, the number of mice
- and H, the number of holes.
- Next I compute N, the number of nodes as the number of mice, plus the number 
of holes plus 2. The plus 2 is to account for the source and the sink nodes.
- As per convention, I always index S and T, the source and the sink to N-1 and 
N-2 to give them unique indeces.

After that I initialize the NetworkFlowSolverBase by providing N, S and T. The 
solver class is defined below. It's the exact same one from the Ford-Fulkerson
source code video. In short, the solver lets you add edges with various
capacities to the flow graph and then find the max flow once it's all setup. The
goal of this video is not to explain how the max flow is found, or how the 
solver works; I already discussed that previously. What I really want to focus 
on is how to setup the flow graph for this problem, and run flow through it.

When the graph is bipartite, like it is for this problem, the setup is pretty
straight forward.

The first setup is to hook up the edge from the source S, to each mouse with
capacity 1. Intuitively, this limits each mouse node to represent at most one 
mouse, this is necessary because we don't want a mouse node to represent more
than one mouse, that doesn't really make sense.

The next part hooks up mouse nodes with hole nodes in the flow graph. This is
the middle section of the flow graph where we add an edge between a mouse node
and a hole if the distance from a mouse to the hole is less than the radius. In
other words, if the mouse can make it to the hole on time, add an edge connecting
the mouse and the hole.

This last step is also important. You need to remember to hook up the edges
between the holes and the sink. These edges are slightly different because their
capacity represents the number of mice which can fit into each particular hole.
Say a hole has a capacity of 3 but there are 5 mice which can make it to that
hole, well cannot allow more than 3 of those mice to fit into the hole so we set
the capacity of this edge to the sink to be 3. Those 2 leftover mice will need
to find another hole or get scooped up by the owl.

The very last thing is to actually get the max flow to determine the number of
safe mice, which for the configuration of holes and mice that I have is 4.

Awesome thank you for watching, please like this video if you learned something
and subscribe for more mathematics and computer science videos.


