[intro_sound] Hello and welcome! My name is william, today we're going to talk about using a BFS to find the shortest path on a grid. This is going to be a really fun video because we're going to solve a problem and i'm going to teach you a bunch of handy tricks when doing graph theory on grids.

[animation] Before we get started, I highly recommend my video introducing the BFS algorithm. Make sure you understand the basics of a BFS before continuing because we will be building off those concepts. There should be a link in the description.

So the motivation behind why we're learning about grids in this video is that a surprising number of problems can easily be represented using a grid which a lot of the time turns it into a graph theory problem. Grids are interesting because they're a form of implicit graph which means that we can determine a node’s neighbours based on our location within the grid.

For instance, finding a path through a maze is a form of grid problem. 

Or perhaps routing a person or thing though obstacles such as trees, rivers, rocks, and etc to get to a particular location.

A common approach to solving graph theory problems on grids is to first convert the grid to a familiar format such as an adjacency list/matrix so we can easily work with them. However, this isn't always the most efficient technique, but we'll get to that.
Suppose we have the grid on the left and we want to represent it as both an adjacency list and an adjacency matrix, what do we do first?

First you should label all the cells in the grid with the numbers 0 through n non-inclusive where n is the product of the number of rows and columns. 

Then we want to actually construct an adjacency list and matrix from the grid. The adjacency list doesn't require any setup because it's simply a map that we initialize, but the adjacency matrix requires us to initialize a matrix of size 6 by 6 to represent our graph. There are 6 rows and 6 columns in the new adjacency matrix because that's how many nodes there are in the grid we're trying to represent. 

Assuming edges are unweighted and cells connect left, right up and down, node 0 connects with node 1 and node 2 which we reflect in the adjacency list and matrix on the right.

Then node 1 connects with node 0 and node 3

Node 2 with nodes 0, 3 and 4

Node 3 with nodes 1, 2 and 5 and so on...

[press]

[press]

[press] and that's how you would convert a grid to an adjacency list or an adjacency matrix.

Once we have an adjacency list or adjacency matrix we are easily able to run whatever specialized graph algorithm we need to solve ur problem such as shortest path, connected components, etc... 
However, transformations between graph representations can usually be avoided due to the structure of a grid. Let me explain.

Due to the structure of a grid, if we are at the red ball in the middle we know we can move left, right, up and down to reach adjacent cells:

Mathematically, if red ball is at the row-column coordinate (r, c) and we can add the row vectors [-1, 0], [1, 0], [0, 1], and [0, -1] to reach adjacent cells.



